The account from which the words
of today’s scripture text is drawn
is really the Scriptural introduction
to these two women
—Mary and Martha.
What do we know about them?
Well, they were siblings,
and they were both women
of faith, disciples of Christ;
and each had
a unique personality and outlook.
That’s not unusual in families, is it?
Now, we can imagine their excitement
in the late summer
or early autumn of the year 32 C.E.
as they prepared their home
for a very special guest,
Jesus, the Son of God.
Can you imagine what it would be like
to have Jesus visit your home?
Well, when Jesus arrived,
Martha was busy with preparations.
But Mary chose to sit at Jesus’ feet,
and the account tells us
that she kept listening.
Martha was a product of her upbringing.
In first-century Jewish life,
women were taught
to care for domestic duties.
So her frustration with her sister
reached a breaking point, didn’t it?
We can read about it in Luke chapter 10.
Turn there with me, please,
to Luke chapter 10,
and beginning in verse 40,
we read that “Martha, on the other hand,
“was distracted
with attending to many duties.
“So she came to [Jesus] and said:
‘Lord, does it not matter to you
“‘that my sister has left me alone
to attend to things?
Tell her to [get up and] come and help me.’”
I think I’ve heard my sister say that to me
in our childhood days,
“Get up and come help me.”
It’s very typical of siblings, isn’t it?
Well, there was a problem.
But was Mary the problem?
Well, the scripture indicates
that Martha was distracted,
so she was probably surprised
when rather than correcting Mary,
Jesus said in verse 41:
“Martha, Martha,
you are anxious
and disturbed about many things.”
It was gentle readjusting.
In verse 42:
“A few things, though,
are needed, or just one.”
So Martha needed to adjust her thinking.
She was distracted,
and then rather than correct Mary,
what did Jesus do?
He commended her, didn’t he?
Now, that was noteworthy too
because in first-century Jewish life
women were not encouraged
to pursue academic studies.
For a woman to sit at the feet of a rabbi
for the purpose of taking in instruction
was very unusual.
But Jesus was not offended by it.
In fact, he commended Mary.
She “chose the good portion,”
or the footnote on the verse
tells us she chose “the best portion.”
Was Martha offended by the counsel?
Well, just a few months later,
we meet Mary and Martha again
in the Bible account in John chapter 11.
And on this occasion, very sadly,
their brother, Lazarus, had died.
But Martha was the first to greet Jesus
when he entered Bethany,
and what followed
was a deep spiritual discussion
that reveals Martha’s faith.
Not only did she express faith
in the resurrection
but she had this to say about Jesus.
If we look at John 11:27:
“She said to him: ‘Yes, Lord, I have believed
“‘that you are the Christ, the Son of God,
the one coming into the world.’”
Martha was a woman of faith.
In verse 32, we find
the only words in the Bible
attributed to Mary:
“Lord, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died.”
Well, both women
were disciples of Christ, women of faith.
Our last glimpse
comes just six days before Jesus died.
He had opportunity, one more time,
to enjoy sweet fellowship with this family
who he loved so much.
In the home of Simon the leper, Jesus,
Mary, Martha, Lazarus,
who had been resurrected,
and Jesus’ apostles gathered for a meal.
Can you imagine what
that must have been like?
Now, in chapter 12 of John, verse 2,
we read that “they spread
an evening meal for [Jesus] . . . ,
and Martha was serving them.”
So here’s her hospitable spirit
coming to the fore,
and Jesus didn’t criticize her for that.
Mary enters the scene in verse 3.
She poured perfumed oil on Jesus’ head.
Subsequent verses tell us
that the oil would have been worth
about a year’s wage
for the common wage earner at that time.
Where did Mary get that oil?
The Bible doesn’t say.
But the point is, she gave her best.
Rather than being focused on food,
she was focused on Jesus.
And just as she had been criticized earlier,
she’s criticized again, but not by Martha.
On this occasion, Judas takes the lead.
The parallel accounts in Matthew and Mark
tell us that the other apostles joined in
on what seemed to be a valid objection.
The oil could have been sold
and given to the poor.
But again, Jesus comes to Mary’s defense.
Verse 7 says: “Let her alone.”
What lessons can we learn
from these two women?
Here are three:
Number one, spiritual people
can make different choices.
They have different strengths.
Isn’t it true that two siblings
can grow up in the same spiritual home?
And on reaching adulthood,
one may feel the need
to marry and have children
and may do a beautiful job
of bringing up children
in the way of Jehovah.
While the other, even from a young age,
may be focused on the full-time ministry,
and that’s the goal.
And in pursuing that goal,
the sibling may decide
to forgo having a family.
He may decide not to marry
in order to serve Jehovah undistracted.
Question: Is one
more spiritual than the other?
Not necessarily.
Jesus didn’t counsel Martha
because she was hospitable.
He counseled Martha
because she was distracted.
In his life story, Stanley Jones,
who spent seven years
in solitary confinement
in a Chinese prison,
speaks of a time when he became distracted.
He was able to get hold of some textbooks,
and he began to read those textbooks,
and he enjoyed them very much.
But he says then: ‘I realized
I was neglecting my Bible reading.’
Now, if it’s possible
for an imprisoned missionary
to become distracted,
we would be fooling ourselves
to think we couldn’t.
Could a Christian parent become distracted?
Could a pioneer become distracted?
Could a Bethelite become distracted?
Secular pursuits, a career,
education, problems, hobbies
—any of those could distract us
so that we neglect spiritual priorities.
And that’s the lesson:
Each day, we need to demonstrate
that we’re choosing “the good portion.”
The second lesson:
Those around you may not always understand
the reason for your choices.
Think about it.
Mary was criticized first by her sister
and then by responsible brothers
for her choices.
And something similar could happen today.
We may have relatives or brothers or sisters
who don’t understand why we sacrifice
our resources, our energy, or our time
to pursue the goals that we pursue.
When that happens, don’t be disheartened.
Remember, you’re not the first.
Mary knew what it was like.
And remember, Jesus
understood and appreciated it.
Finally, lesson number three:
Like Jesus, be quick
to commend those around you
who have demonstrated
that they’re choosing the good portion.
In our congregation,
we have youngsters and older ones as well.
Right here in our work environment,
we’re surrounded by individuals
who have chosen the good portion.
Commend them.
Express appreciation.
And in reflecting that appreciative attitude
of Jehovah and Jesus,
you will strengthen your own resolve
to go on choosing the good portion.